the question i ask everybody is if you
got the exact same genes i mean they're
small uh variations for mutation and so
forth but effectively it's the same
genes why do you look different well it
turns out it's not your genes it's which
of those genes are on and which of those
genes are off and it's not only all the
rage it's also all the
excitement of this idea can you reverse
your epigenome to a younger state
[Music]
peter diamandis welcome back to the show
tom it is a pleasure it's been way too
long my friend it has been coveted
really
messed up my rhythms and all of that and
then i am super excited that you've
published a new book which we're going
to be talking all about but i want to
know so when you and i first met it was
really all about space yes and
exponential technology exactly
and now we've really shifted into
regenerative medicine
health tech biotech regenerative
uh longevity age reversal whatever terms
you want
um yeah age reversal personally yes i
and we'll talk about that yeah and i've
become obsessed with david sinclair who
you guys talk about in the book i have
found fundamentally as i've gotten older
that my mindset and what i focus on has
changed in ways that i wouldn't have
predicted so interesting until i was
probably 44 45 i was i just thought
about living forever all my plans were
about living forever and it really
didn't
sink in the usefulness of thinking about
the fact that i am going to die
and then at about 45 it switched for me
and it started to feel more useful to
think about the fact that we might not
hit escape velocity in my lifetime oh
we're gonna hit it baby and then i had a
year where it was like i i don't think
it will happen for me and then i read
david sinclair's book yes and i thought
this might actually happen yeah and that
was the first time in a while where i
thought maybe i was pessimistic for a
minute
why are you so optimistic is it
regenerative medicine like what is it
that really clicked for you in my early
life my first
40 years of life i'm 60 now
my early life you look amazing thank you
i feel amazing i feel like you know 20 i
have an internal mental age of 28 and
i've got a you know a biological age of
49 and a half so we'll we can talk about
that
um
my first 40 years were space no question
about it it was like star trek and
apollo we're going there
then i met ray kurzweil i read his book
the singularity is near we started
singularity university together and i
became enamored with
exponential technologies computation
sensors networks ai robotics 3d printing
synthetic biology ar vr blockchain all
those technologies being the tools to
solve the world's biggest problems right
and so
that merged well with the work i do at
xprize
and it was about eight years ago and
this was around the time that you and i
were
really
becoming friends and connecting that i
became enamored
with the idea of longevity i'd always
been interested in longevity when i was
in medical school i remember
watching a tv show on long-lived sea
life that certain species of whales like
the bowhead well could live for 200
years and the greenland shark can make
it to four or 500 years and i'm like
thinking there's a jellyfish that's
basically immortal immortal yes yeah and
you know and sea turtles you know are
thought to be hundreds of years and i'm
i'm thinking if they can do it why can't
we
right i mean seriously that's so you
though like the
that's one of the things that i love
about you is that you just refuse to
accept things as they are and it's like
now i can make this better yeah well i
was thinking at that moment that it's
either a hardware problem or a software
problem
and that we're going to get the tools to
fix that and we are what's happening
right now will you define that for me at
the cellular level so in my head i was
trying to figure out which you consider
hardware and which you can see so i
consider the software the genome and the
epigenome
so our dna your your the dna and the
metastructures around the dna we'll talk
about the epigenome and the
uh hardware i consider the you know
cellular organelles and uh the
structures of the cell
and they they sort of have a blurry
definition between them
uh
but at the end of the day uh the tech
it's it's really the fact that biology
has become a a digital
tech as well right we've digitized
biology we've turned into ones and zeros
we are
sequencing so when the nih first
sequence the human genome we have 3.2
billion letters in our genome 3.2 from
our mom 3.2 from our dad
and uh
the human genome project cost about
three billion dollars and took a decade
to get a sequence
uh craig venter uh
did it in about
nine months with a hundred million
dollars so crazy and since then we've
seen this
precipitous drop i mean we're talking
five times faster than moore's law whoa
the speed at which computers are getting
better right crazy five times faster and
we're down now to you can sequence a
genome uh in about seven hours
right and the costs are below a thousand
there's you know question of whether and
the prediction from illumina the major
sequencing company out there is that
we'll get down to an hour and a hundred
bucks
right so i mean it's the point where
enter the hospital and your sequence
like it's like check your bp sequence
you you know see what's going on it is
so how targeted are things getting now
in terms of taking that sequencing
actually knowing something from it and
targeting the whether it's still early
days okay still early days uh where it's
having an impact is in cancer
therapies so being able to to sequence
the cancer
that someone biopsies and saying okay
this cancer is going to be
only radiation uh
you know affected by radiation therapy
this one can take a chemotherapy or more
importantly we're going to create a
specific
gene therapy or crispr therapy or
vaccine therapy against that cancer is
anybody running ai against the so when
you have the simple mutations where it's
like this disease is related to this
gene and that's it there's no complex
interactions but
as
as we go beyond those things and get
into the more complex things
is anybody running ai to start assessing
it's actually these 72 different gene
interactions that cause whatever that's
the dream that is the dream but nobody's
doing that yet well it's being done um
you know human longevity when it was
uh
bob hurry craig venter and i put that
company together and you you know that
um the vision was
large-scale genome sequencing
and
at the same time large-scale phenotype
assessment you know full-body mri
all of that information
and then sorry so that people that don't
know phenotype phenotype is the way that
your genes express so i look at you and
what i see that's your phenotype yes
you're trying to get a correlation
between
everyone with these active
these genes
um
and this environmental
impact
ended up with this kind of a cancer or
everyone more importantly
who had these genes um eating this kind
of diet
lived longer or you know so there how
how do your genes impact
your workout your diet all of those
things and what we're learning is that
genes are not your destiny
right it's very important to know and
you know this from your own personal
work
in in weight loss and diet
and mindset
it's your obsession
that you can your epigenome will get
into that epi from the greek word above
your epigenome is
which genes are on and which genes are
off you can think about your 3.2 billion
genes or 3.2 billion uh
you know nucleotides letters in your
your dna alphabet
which is tens of thousands of genes as
those genes are sort of the the keys on
a piano i was going to ask you so and
and the piano player is your epigenome
okay so let me just push on that for a
minute
i have my dna yes it's got these four
letters they repeat over and over and
over and over
those groupings of letters
which are
revealed through methylation which we'll
get into in a minute
but what what is revealed in my
very complexly wrapped dna
will determine what that cell becomes
yes because my dna strand contains all
the genes
all of the genes together
um well so all of the genes have to be
broken up into in this place
play this note to go with your piano
analogy and but over here so in the eye
play the eye notes in the knee play the
knee notes in the brain play the brain
notes yes and so you've got this long
ass string of dna because it for most
people
i'll assume because it for me this is
how it is that you get the concept of
dna you get the concept of
genes you don't really know how they
relate so let me let me break it down
your 3.2 billion letters
are broken up into 23 chromosomes
and we sort of remember that from our
high school biology right and those
chromosomes
are
uh super tightly wrapped and compact
right if you stretched out the dna from
a chromosome it would be meters long but
it's ravel together if it when it's so
compact and raveled in the structure and
using these proteins called histones
the dna becomes very difficult to read
now what do you mean read the dna so the
dna a gene has a start and an end
and typically it is red
with a tren uh transcription uh process
that turns from your dna to a messenger
rna and from a messenger into rna to a
protein a protein can be an enzyme it
can be actin a myosin from muscle it can
be all kinds of things proteins are sort
of the structural building blocks
they're
the major operating
carrier of operations in the body
and so if your dna is so tightly wound
that you can't actually read it then
it's inert
and so the dna needs to be opened up in
certain points to be read to have
an appropriate
translation into proteins
and in the beginning
when life begins we have a pluripotent
stem cell so a stem cell and pluripotent
means it can become anything that stem
cell can become
uh heart liver lung kidney skin brain
whatever it might be
cell and it's super specialized
and it's super specialized because like
you said
the part of the dna that codes for
keratin or whatever the right protein is
in in hair and skin
is revealed
but the other parts that might make a
nerve cell are are bound up and hidden
so
that process
of
of which genes are turned on and which
genes are turned off is called the
epigenome
now it gets interesting to our age
reversal conversation which i i think
will will sort of dominate our
conversation here
uh is if i said to you tom you've got
the exact same genes at birth at 20 at
40 at you know when you're 80. so why do
you look different
why don't you have like you know you
probably do have a ripped sick pack but
why
why don't you look like you were look
like when you were 20.
um thank god thank god in your case my
body better face maybe not so much
so the question i ask everybody is if
you got the exact same genes i mean
they're small
variations for mutation and so forth
but effectively it's the same genes why
do you look different
why don't you look like a baby or like
an 80 year old man
well it turns out it's not your genes
it's which of those genes are on and
which of those genes are off
and that's called your epigenome and
it's not only all the rage it's also all
the excitement
of this idea can you reverse your
epigenome to a younger state this
episode is sponsored by future go to try
future dot co slash impact to get your
first month for only 19
you can also click the link at the top
of the episode description now enjoy the
episode so the question is and this is
what i found really interesting about
david sinclair and his work and an
amazing book called lifespan and i
commend it to everybody it's absolutely
phenomenal your book life force and
lifespan go together extraordinary
they're a beautiful one-two punch for
real
and
what's interesting is i never really
understood what was causing aging in the
first place and so walk us through
the
what methylation should do
and then his idea what does he call it d
differentiation x differentiation x
differentiation i think where basically
a cell should be an eye cell and it
starts to break down and maybe it's
revealing a little bit of like here's
some of the skin cell here's a nerve
cell like a fragment of it and so yes
the and helping people understand what's
happening in the cell that they're
actually little things proteins moving
around like eating this stuff the cell
when you look into the cell it is insane
the level of complexity within
complexity within complexity
it's
literally miraculous that we are alive
and what is going on you know we have 40
trillion cells in our body
right 40 trillion cells
and each of them is a living organism
and we don't think about the fact that
we're this massive collection of cells
collaborating to have this conversation
and then within our body won't get into
it but are all of the bacteria and
viridi and all of that which outstrip
the number of human cells in us
okay back to the original point
so
you're born uh
uh you're in the
womb
your placenta uh is actually the organ
that generates all the stem cells
that manufacture the baby i think the
placenta is the 3d printer that
manufactures the manufactures the baby
and you're born
and
you
your body goes through a pre-programmed
process that
allows you to mature into adulthood now
there's a series of seven genes
called the sirtuin genes and these genes
are producing these sirtuin proteins
and
these are the linchpin
of aging it's the work that david
sinclair and george church have done so
beautifully
and it turns out that your sirtuin genes
and proteins have
um
a dual function
that are critical for your uh for your
life and their competing functions so
let me take this
a step at a time
so your sirtuin genes one function is
they're in control
of
your epigenome they're controlling
which genes are on and which genes are
off
and we'll get to methylation
a little bit
but
that's a really important function for
them is keeping
your genes your eye genes and i gene
your skin genes a skin gene and and so
forth so the epigenome is controlled and
they do that by detecting damage in the
dna and reporting so that's the second
function no they're doing this by
controlling certain methylation proteins
and which hide or reveal which high to
reveal so the sirtuin genes are uh have
a function of of controlling the
epigenome to make sure that the right
genes are are being
opened uh to be red
and the right genes are being closed
what process do they use for that in
this first part it is controlling the
methylation of the dna okay so the dna
let's go there the dna um
is methylated at different locations a
methyl group is a is a carbon with three
hydrogens and when you methylate it uh
it hides the ability for that piece of
dna to be red
it it will stop it from from being red
and when you demethylate it it can open
it up and there are methylation uh
transcription factors that the sirtuin
genes are impacting here
so if they're doing their job they're
controlling the epigenome appropriately
in that cell
but the sirtuin genes have a competitive
job which is they're in charge of dna
repair at the same time
and so as we are
experiencing life i wouldn't say aging
but experiencing life we are constantly
being hit by cosmic rays
especially when we're flying at 48 000
feet in the upper atmosphere uh
secondhand smoke uh other chemical
mutant uh
mutagens and so we're accumulating
dna damage in our cells and the number i
heard was like it's between a thousand
to a million
um mutations a day per cell i mean it's
a lot so there's a lot of work to sell
per cell
it's crazy okay um but what does that
damage look like well g gets knocked off
and it starts yeah it's a few things it
can be a single strand break
it can be a double strand break
it can be a um
and so it's breaking of the dna
and that is happening from uh
from
oxidation it's happening from you know
free electrons if you would hitting the
dna and it's it's
nicking the the dna and then what
happens is you've got all you have
incredible repair mechanisms that are
there
and uh if you have a double strand break
right dna's double stranded if it breaks
uh you've got one system that will fix
double strand breaks
and you have another system that will
fix a single strand break and there's a
number of different repair systems there
which frankly i've forgotten since
medical school but
just amazing what we're able to do and
sometimes when they make the repair
they'll instead of a
a g they'll put a t
and that's when you have a a permanent
mutation
that can lead to a cancer
now
there's because that's effectively
created a new gene
it's modified a gene okay and that that
you have four letters a t c and g
and those letters in groups of three
code for an amino acid as part of a
protein and
long story short the sirtuins are
helping you maintain your genes in a
proper working order it's helping you
repair your genes
now here's the challenge
sirtuins
are powered by
uh nad plus nicotinamide adenine diphos
uh dinucleotide
nadz nad
uh and nad is sort of the energy
currency in your cells
uh how does that relate to uh atp so it
is
atp and nad are in the same in the same
cycle okay right and they're uh you're
using atp to activate your nad
nad
powers the sirtuins
the challenge is that your nad levels
inside your cells drop precipitously
after 40. interesting right more than
half so you're you're slowing your
ability to repair i want you to let's
use the piano player analogy
um
the genes that you're playing
as the epic genome
you're playing the proper piano
at the same time as a sir two and you're
over here fixing something so you're
going from playing the piano to fixing
something and playing the piano to
fixing something and you need food to
keep yourself going
but all of a sudden you're spending more
and more time fixing something because
the dna damage is accumulating and the
amount of food you have or in my case
coffee to drink is reducing and so i've
gotten less energy and i'm being
distracted and having to fix the dna and
i'm losing control of playing the piano
right so all of a sudden
your epigenome is becoming confused
your skin's
skin is not making the right proteins to
keep it elastic and and smooth and it's
it's falling apart and so that
from david sinclair's book and we talk
we have an entire chapter on david in
fact one of the things we do is we
uh tony and i in the book
uh have a number of heroes that we go
deep into and david who's uh professor
of genomics at uh at harvard medical
school he's brilliant he's one of the
top brilliant thinkers long story short
that's what's going on this competition
between repairing dna and controlling
your epigenome and having your nad
levels fall over time
is what's
driving us
to look older at age 80 or 90 or 100.
are you supplementing nad i am i'm not
so uh that's one of the one of the
elements so it turns out that um
you want you want to boost your nad
levels in your cell
and there are
you know people go and get uh nad
uh ivs
the problem is uh at least according to
david and a few other uh
scientists who i who i believe their
their work
and they there's not a carrier to take
the nad from
in the bloodstream into the cells
and so what you want to do is supplement
it and there are two precursors to nad
one is nmn
and the other one is nr
um and those we can transfer those those
can get into the cell and in higher
levels in the cell they drive higher
levels of nad so i take a gram of nad of
nmn every morning
and then i take
another supplement basis that has
nicotinamide riboside nr in it and
between those two
for me it's
working to maintain now do i know that
they're increasing or is this on faith
it's on on faith we're you know i hope
that the ability to measure it
intracellularly will become easier
because it's not easy today
but theoretically it should be
supporting it and i feel great and i've
got more energy i've ever had
and
there's a few other supplements in the
book we talk about something called
mib-626 which is an nmn analog
that is in trials right now and it's
going to go through not so nmn and nr
are supplements you can buy them on the
web
there's
a hundred different versions the
challenge is that a lot of them uh are
not in a crystallized form and they
break down easily in any kind of heat on
shipping they may last 30 days and so
just you know please uh
look into it we write about it uh in in
life force about
uh that that fact that they're not all
the same do you guys have a resource on
fountain life to
yeah so if you go to lifeforce.com there
are two
uh
you can order the book there but then
there are a number of resources
there one is for fountain life the other
one is for
uh my uh my life force where there
are
uh a number of recommended supplements
that you can get access to there
but that's not that's not the purpose
here when i really get into
the book's mission is to give people
hope
and to give people a game plan of what
they can do mib 626
comes out of a company called eden rock
uh
the founder of eaton rock ed sherlock
attended
one of my su executive programs 10 years
ago
after selling his you know
exiting with tens of millions from one
of his companies and got so enamored
with biotech
that he's built this multi-billion
dollar biotech company that is
extraordinary and one of the things
working with david sinclair is they've
created a
a
nmn
analog molecule that they're taking
through fda approval right now and it's
been secret for a while it was just
revealed that the special forces
have been
doing a trial with them
using the special
molecule mib-626
to
increase
special forces ability for energy and
working out in long duration and to
increase cognitive capabilities and so
you know i i can't say too much more but
there's the potential of swat would
break in and yeah
there's a potential for having uh
truly
pharmacological
agents that are available to us that
increase our ability to have muscle and
strength and cognition say it for me one
more time mib 626 does exactly what so
right now from there was an article
written it was leaked out of us special
forces that they're using it to increase
uh
endurance and strength and is it playing
on the nad pathway it is it is
supplementing uh more effectively nad in
the cells
and also is this out like are you
supplementing it's not available yet no
it's in it's in very strict trials
instead of going a supplement route
they're going an fda trial route
which will enable them to make specific
claims because they'll have the data
and uh you know hopefully in in two
years three at the outmost it will
become something that your physician can
uh can order for you i love the uh
story that
that ed schulack told me about one of
his friends who was a world champion
chess player in his 50s and early 60s
and now he's in the 70s but he's
supplementing with this molecule and
he's now back up to world championship
chess playing so i mean we all
want to live into our 80s 90s hundreds
the question is you don't want to be
drooling in a wheelchair yeah i mean
cognitive function is one of the most
important things
the the supplement that the chess master
is taking is that
uh the mib 626 yes that's the one
and i i'm i'm excited to get my hands on
it as soon as i can but i'm kidding but
does that so if if i'm understanding
what you're saying correctly about the
nad pathway and i'm basically giving the
energy to the sirtuins that they're
going to need to both play and repair so
that'll make sense yeah
but if
if taking that is improving my cognition
is is it that the cells are actually
being repaired better i don't know other
than to say your brain
is one of you know is is using 30 of
your body's energy output at any one
time it's disproportionate right
thinking is so you might just be feeding
it better maybe yeah and of course the
brain is is interesting yeah it is
it is fascinating
um you keep giving me the chills like
this is so this is why i'm so excited
about it right so i've i've switched my
venture fund bold capital to
instead of all exponentials we're like
70 into biotech and health it's like the
biggest business out there i've started
four companies in the last couple of
years in the biotech health tech
longevity space i just think there's no
bigger market it's like for me i want to
make as much capital as i can in that
space and then i'll go back to the space
space right yeah
god this is so intriguing so the more i
have forced myself to understand the
mechanisms that are happening yes the
one more intrigued i have become but two
it's really beginning to influence the
things that i'm doing so
i'd love to talk to you about diet yeah
and
it's funny how slow i am to actually
change my diet but that i start talking
about it long before i do
um
so
i have historically been
way heavy on meat and it makes me feel
so good i just could not wrap my head
around
when i have tried a heavier plant-based
diet i haven't felt as good as i do with
meat
then exploring the ideas you guys talk
about very eloquently in the
book
and beginning to understand that okay if
red meat is triggering mtor
and mtor is triggering growth
and growth is giving my body the signal
everything's abundant all is well
but
the very thing that makes you live a
long time is sending the body the signal
yo yo things may not be like going as
well in the environment as we think you
better like you know kind of constrict a
little bit go to hibernation right
exactly which is why um caloric
restriction is the only thing they've
seen work across every species they've
ever tried it on in terms of longevity
yes
and when i heard that i was like oh man
so that would explain why i feel good i
you know i can add muscle mass i feel
phenomenal but i'm not giving my body
the signal for longevity walk me through
like
so we're gonna talk about uh four
things that i or five things i think are
important for longevity that are the
basics and we can start with diet first
you talk about sleep
you need to talk about exercise you talk
about mindset and then the the fifth one
for me is
uh
daily
annual uploads it's not dying from
something stupid and and uh it's really
really important to talk about the
diagnostic side of the equation not
every diet is right for every person
your diet is really impacted by
your
genetics
and also by your gut flora
and just to be clear if you had to guess
and i know this is a guess but if you
had to guess is it weighted more towards
your microbiome or waited more towards
your genetics
i am actually gonna guess it's more
towards your microbiome yeah that's my
instinct
as well okay uh so
the there's certain things that are true
and you know the single most fundamental
part of your diet is sugar is poison
right sugar is
causes neuroinflammation
absolutely clear it causes
cardiac disease absolutely clear right
sugar feeds cancers
and so getting rid of sugar is is the
most important move anybody can make and
do you consider that just like actual
refined sugar as an ingredient or are
you looking at carbohydrates well i'm
also talking about you know uh low uh
high glycemic index
carbs as well stuff that becomes sugar
in your bloodstream bread pasta white
rice yeah so
um
i am
where do you fall on fruit i
eat a lot of blackberries and
blueberries because they've got
additional benefits right i sort of stay
away from melons and orange juice and
and things that become
instantly become sugar in your
bloodstream i i've gone
hardcore vegan and then i've gone
hardcore keto
and i've gone back to
a mediterranean so i will typically eat
as much veggies as i can i mean i'm
pounding salads uh
peppers uh you know
just as much greens as i can and i love
a great greek salad
tons of olive oil
cheese on it i put feta cheese on it i
do i enjoy it's the only cheese i
actually eat especially because it's a
harder cheese because um i'm lactose
intolerant thank god uh and then
yeah because i think um i think cow milk
today is detrimental there's a number of
studies that show that cow milk is in
particular the type of cow milk that's
dominant in the u.s is is not good for
you and i don't have enough
science on the tip of my tongue to back
that up but go and google and take a
look around i will supplement that with
typically fish
salmon when i can
uh do i love a piece of bacon now and
then 100
it's you know it's breakfast candy
but i try and minimize i don't eat any
red meat i don't uh
or you know any
any beef
i'll eat some chicken uh some and some
fish and
but it's
80 90
uh
diving into veggies
and that works for me it doesn't work
for everybody and is any of that so
obviously some of it's just experimental
you've tried it is any of that driven by
this idea of mtor and not wanting to
trigger that pathway so what's driven
there is
my intermittent fasting
so
i will
get up i will not eat lunch until about
two o'clock
and then i will
have a late lunch and an early dinner
um and try not to overeat and i hope to
be done by dinner by seven and then i
will fast till the next day at two david
sinclair does one meal a day at dinner
and then he's he's fasting and so i'm
carrying with me
you know this is my what on earth is
that it's athletic greens in fiji water
right so this will be what i drink
so do you think that you're not getting
enough uh of the i assume you do the
athletic greens for the micronutrients
are you worried you're not getting
enough in all the salads that you're
pounding no um
i
this
adds
probably certain ones that i'm not
getting but it also makes it uh
more enjoyable to drink than just plain
water it does get a bit boring
where's your what's your take on uh
carbonated water
interesting right so i've been all over
the place i enjoy carbonated water and
the question is is it acidifying your
your bloodstream or not
so
i just
listen if if i were some day to get
cancer i'd be going all alkaline i'd be
zero sugar you know it's just like i'm
going to fight it on every front
until then i will uh i'm probably 80
flat and 20 percent carbonated at dinner
it's like a bottle of pellegra of what
yeah exactly
very interesting so
i don't know what it is i whatever is
best for me i'm always like to the right
of that so i drink uh
basically every ounce of water that i
intake is carbonated yeah so i don't
drink sodas or anything like that sodas
again phosphoric acid and sugar you know
just say no
so going back to red meat for a second
so do you avoid red meat because of the
um
the correlative studies on
uh increased cancer cancer
yes and i've i've just
i've learned to just not like it as well
after time it just is you know
it's not what i'm gonna eat
you know if i if i'm gonna eat anything
other than uh fish a little bit of
chicken and a little bit of pork
but that's my personal you know and
again it's really maximizing the amount
of uh of greens of uh colorful greens
you know uh broccoli uh with olive oil
and lemon is awesome uh you know who
would have thunk i love brussels sprouts
do brussels sprouts are delicious i'm
not sure if they're cooked well if
they're coconut oil yeah people's beef
but i will say that i like brussels
sprouts with bacon yeah i do love butter
sprouts
so good yeah
yeah i i am surprised when you get
something cooked well just how delicious
um
vegetarian items can be vegan items can
be and and i i will set aside all the
stuff that just you know puts a ton of
sugar in it have you heard of shrimp
i have not so rich roll who i think you
know i'm going to see later today
amazing guy
phenomenal podcast his wife created this
vegan cheese
which
after
the whole so my thing i am still eating
a ton of red meat i want everybody to be
very clear but i am going through this
intellectual exercise of exploring this
idea of mtor and like if if red meat is
triggering that and you need to put your
body in a totally different state in
order to um get the longevity so i'm
like okay well are there vegan things
that i can try so rich ends up sending
me some of his wife's cheese
it is so good i i literally freaked out
i was texting him like homie this is
freakish
and so
uh yeah i'm always a little tense when
something's highly processed but
nonetheless this stuff is amazing the
ingredient list
when i see him i'm going to ask him for
some dude it's so good you are going to
love it i i literally can't believe how
delicious they've made this stuff and
that's where i'm like okay like if
if there are things that i can do that
are
really delicious and i can measure and
this is where this gets interesting i
can measure its effect on whether it's
my telomeres or i forget what the
inside tracker what's inside tracker is
is one yes what is it they're looking
for in that is it methylation so they're
they have uh an epigenetic clock
because when you say that you're you're
49 biologically so it turns out that
going back to our
epigenome and the methylation sequence
um
there
is a methylation pattern
that changes over time
and you can measure it and uh
there is a
a number of methylation clocks
and so inside tracker uses one uh
fountain life i think uses the same one
and and so i
give some blood and they
do not the dna sequence but they look at
the methylation and they say you have
the methylation pattern of a 49 year old
even though you're 60.
and so
david sinclair who when the time we
wrote the book was 53 and had a
methylation pattern of someone who was
33. whoa right and so that's my goal 20
years it's amazing um and so do you do
things and then do the tracker and look
at and go okay cool i am
constantly
varying my supplements my exercise my
diet
in directions that
are pro-age reversal
and so let's talk about some of the
other ones so on the diet side just to
summarize you know the recommendation is
intermittent fasting
you know at a minimum you know eat an
early dinner you're like 19 hours
i'm yeah i'm roughly 7 p.m until
uh till one
so yeah that's uh what is that six minus
24 18 hours right on the extreme i'll do
one meal a day but typically it's eight
you know six on 18 off
uh the second thing uh is i'll try and
you know bring in at least two liters of
water a day right
if on a great day i can do three just
pounding water we are constantly
dehydrated we don't drink enough water
i want to ask about that and i don't i
we have more so let's yeah put a pin and
not lose where we were but every time
somebody says to drink that much water
there is a skeptical part of my brain
that's just like from an evolutionary
standpoint there was no way we had
access to a great point that that is a
really great point
um so uh
in the book we provide some of the
studies in the background on on water
intake i'm taking this on
gospel truth i don't have the science
behind it
putting that aside minimizing sugar
that's clear plant-based diet maximizing
my plants
intake and then adding supplementing it
with you know i do eat eggs i do eat
fish and so that's more of a
mediterranean diet which is you know
genetically and you know historically my
background
let's go to the next subject sleep
uh
evolutionarily
if our species could have evolved to
sleep less
it would have been such a boom to get
extra hours in the day for finding food
protecting yourself
mating that
we would have slept less but the fact
that we don't that we need eight hours
of sleep
uh is a fundamental fact your brain
needs it i remember when i was in
medical school i used to pride myself on
like
i can get by with five hours five and a
half and that was a stable point for me
and now i pride myself on getting eight
hours i got my aura ring
i set the temperature in the room to 65
degrees i have a cooling blanket i've
got these great manta eye shades that
are so comfortable i um
you know and i go to sleep i try and be
asleep by 9 30
so i can get up at 5 30 and i'm like did
i make eight hours it's like i'm i'm
trying to i'm trying to hit that
and i think that's really important have
you set a goal to work out more but
don't know which exercises to start with
future is here to help future is a new
fitness app that connects you with an
online personal trainer who will send
you workouts each week monitor your
performance and message you to keep you
motivated
if you don't already have one future
will send you an apple watch to borrow
for the duration of your membership
which is amazing and your trainer will
use that to monitor your progress
tracking your heart rate and activity
data while you work out your phone your
watch and your trainer all work
seamlessly together so if you want a
workout plan that's built for you not
the masses that will keep you focused
and motivated then go to try future dot
co slash impact to try your first month
for just 19
that's cheaper than most gym memberships
once again go to try future dot co slash
impact to try your first month for just
you can also click the link at the top
of the episode description all right
guys take care and be legendary
how about you how are you doing on sleep
dude i'm freakish about sleep so i
one thing that i will say i'm very proud
because i'm definitely a hustle porn guy
like telling people go hard uh but i've
always told people get sleep and that is
a priority in my life so i'm in bed at 9
pm like it's a religion yes i don't set
an alarm so i wake up when i wake up
nice now i will say that there are times
in my life where i am so
intense on something that i end up not
getting a ton of i just wake up yeah but
i know that if i were to back off and do
to have less stress in my life that i
would sleep more so even though i'm not
waking up to an alarm i am doing things
mentally that end up
reducing my sleep so i'm not thrilled
with that if you were to track right now
my average per night is between six and
six and a half okay i'm i'm hitting a
minimum of seven and i'm routinely
hitting eight hours which i'm really
happy about
uh but it's really getting up and having
the energy in in the morning right so i
do my best writing early same yeah it's
like i used to be in i remember medical
school and graduate school i was uh you
know i'd be pounding at 2 a.m and 3 a.m
and and like that was my
and my my schedule was flipped where
i
mental clarity
first two hours of the day
yeah so i don't know how much credence
to give to chronotype but when i was
young so that i went through a period
where i was unemployed and
in that period my
my sleep time just kept getting pushed
later and later and later
and i realized i had a problem when i
had to set an alarm to make a 10 p.m
movie
and i was like whoa all right so and you
just start to feel weird one you're not
seeing the sun two you're not really
seeing other people yeah because you
know when you go to the grocery store
it's one in the morning and so there's
two other people in the store
and i was like something doesn't feel
right here and so i forced myself to get
back onto a normal schedule but um but
now i'm like man when eight o'clock
comes around i'm like can i go to bed
yet can i go to bed
so it's not like somebody has to
convince me to go to bed at night i'm
ready to go to bed
and uh yeah that's yeah i know i want to
feel good in the morning yeah i got 10
and a half year old boys that are
typically in bed at 7 30 and asleep by
eight and i'm like ready to go to sleep
then too yup it's like i'm like oh god
please go to sleep so i'm going to sleep
yeah um so uh sleep is critical uh eight
hours um
let's go to exercise next right i mean
it's still the fundamentals of diet
sleep exercise uh for me i try and get
in
my 10 000 steps a day i'll take my
meetings as many meetings as i can
walking
i'll take my phone calls walking i'll
take my zoom calls on my phone walking
just to get that in and then i do a
weight workout twice a week and light
weights uh you know every day how about
you uh so i work out four to five days a
week and i do basically exclusively
lifting
i won't call it heavy because i used to
lift heavy and i definitely don't do
that anymore but i
lift things that i can do say five to
six reps
um
unless i'm doing something for deadlifts
deadlifts i do ultra high reps so like
15 to 20 plus reps yeah and i do that
because i had i just kept injuring my
back and so don't want to play with that
anymore but i find if i don't dead lift
my back starts to hurt so i've kept it
in there but i keep it ultra high rep
now one thing you guys talk about the
book is and i'm forgetting the name but
where you're not trying to move the
weight you're actually trying to push
against the almost removable object yeah
so that's a uh and there's uh
osteostrong is one of the companies that
enables that but it's it's when you've
got a uh a weight even in you know if
you're doing curls and you've exhausted
your muscles and you can bring it up and
just hold it until it it goes down it's
that that point of maximum contraction
and maximum force
and it's signaling the muscles at that
point you're just trying to signal them
uh
i think the molecule is amp adenosine
monophosphate that that triggers muscle
growth one of the things i think is
important for people to know is
muscle mass is an indicator of longevity
there is a direct correlation and
there's a couple of reasons thought
number one
uh your muscles store blood and stem
cells in them and the second is a lot of
people die
post falls
you know
you
break your hip you break your pelvis is
how my dad passed you know ends up in
the hospital and then there's a
pneumonia and i just hear this story
over and over again i just
you know got my mom a trainer god bless
her she's 86 um and it's like i have the
dedication the book to her saying mom
you're going to make it over 100 please
and it's like get a trainer to keep her
muscles uh toned as much as possible
yeah yeah muscle is a a very big deal um
how do you think about like when you're
so i guess you intake some meat you
intake eggs so not a big deal but that's
one thing that i when i hear that
i start
sketching out between okay wait i'm
gonna need to trigger mtor to build the
muscle mass but mtor is also
i won't see directly shortening i'm yeah
i don't know enough to make the
statement so people check me up on this
but this is what i think that mtor is
effectively shortening my life compared
to what it could be if i wasn't
constantly living in mtor so it's this
weird balance of needing the muscle mass
which my understanding of one of the
reasons that muscle mass is so effective
to your point is that it's a storage
mechanism so it's storing
you just talked about stem cells blood
but also amino acids and so um oh god
i'm forgetting his name
but there's this guy back at quest we
used to talk to all the time very
accomplished scientist and he was like
you would see like a burn victim
and if they had muscle
and within like
three weeks their muscle would just be
gone because the body was just stripping
it of the amino acids so it could repair
and rebuild the skin and i was like whoa
that is because i had never thought
about yeah that there because when you
lift you realize you guys talk about
this in the book that you it does feel a
little fusion in that if you stop
working out you're going to lose that
muscle mass distressingly quickly yeah
and so my thing is okay hold on if if
the body is like you're going to have to
put me in like an adapt or die state for
me to put the muscle on and then if you
stop putting me in that state i'm going
to strip you of the muscle muscles
clearly very expensive the body is
nervous in my words to hold on to muscle
so the question becomes okay one why is
it expensive
and then two
what is it
if it's correlated with all-cause
mortality what is it doing that makes it
valuable enough that you do want to keep
some
but that it does get thrashed here's
here's the a couple of really important
data points here so your body is
constantly remodeling itself and you
know this right bone and muscle
remodel based upon your needs if you
don't need it
you lose it and so if you're in bed rest
bone density and and muscle
uh disappears
and
the challenge is that our bodies were
never evolved to live past age 30.
so if we go back sort of to evolutionary
biology 100 000 years ago on the
savannas of africa you'd go into puberty
at age 12 or 13.
and before birth control you were
pregnant
and by the time you're now 27 28 years
old your baby is having a baby
and back then before mcdonald's and
whole food before you know we had
abundant amount of food available 24 7
the last thing you wanted to do to
perpetuate the species was steal food
from your grandchildren's mouths
and the best thing you could do was die
right and give your bits back to the
environment and not hold back your tribe
and so
the average human life span 100 000
years ago was you know 30-ish and even
100 years ago was just 40. um
not that you couldn't live longer
but the average lifespan
from childhood mortality and early
deaths and everything was was 40.
and so
genetically
everything that would kill you
after 30
after reproductive age was never
selected against
so all the stuff in your you know
cardiac disease in your 50s and cancer
in your 60s and 70s and
dementia in your 80s and 90s was never
biologically selected against and even
retaining muscle mass and bone mass was
never advantageously selected again if
we had if we could reproduce
into our hundreds then
the people who had the most muscle the
the most you know cognition the the most
the least disease
their genes would perpetuate and
that would be a positive feedback loop
but that just hasn't been the case
muscle is critically important i'll talk
about one of my companies
that i just took public this year called
vaccinity
and it's a super cool company
it is
a company that
creates what they're called peptide
vaccines right so a peptide is a small
sequence of amino acids it's a piece of
a protein and it's we do these specially
designed vaccines i'm a co-founder and
vice chairman of the company the the
brilliant individuals are meimei who
who's the ceo and lou reese who's the
executive chairman
they've built
this vaccine company it's got a covet 19
vaccine which we just got data
yesterday we just announced today
that uh it's
three times more effective as a booster
than the pfizer vaccine wow which i'm
super excited about and what mechanism
is it uses peptides
so what we do is we create
a peptide sequence
uh
in the shape of part of the covid virus
but it's not the
you're not putting mrna to create the
spike
that is then shed and then picked up
we we generate
um
part of the shape of the spike
and it's attached to a very we'll call
it a very provocative
uh protein that is
um
seen by the by the body is dangerous
and those two combinations cause your
immune system to form antibodies against
the portion of the covet vaccine
but it is
uh
super mellow there's very low
reactogenicity uh to the vaccine so i'm
hopeful it'll become sort of the
safer booster vaccine and that's great
but that's not what i'm talking about
here
we've been able to also create vaccines
against targets in the body
against alzheimer's
against parkinson's against
hypercholesterolemia which is stroke and
heart disease and we're developing
against bone loss and muscle loss how
does that work like if people are so
let's take alzheimer's which i imagine
is one of the harder ones
what is it they're targeting because
it's not still a big question so it's
targeting uh the beta amyloid which is
build up
and so if you can target that what
happens is your body starts creating
antibodies which goes attaches to the
beta amyloid in these
these uh short chain beta amyloid and
then extracts them out before they build
up
obviously i am not an expert on
alzheimer's but the idea of beta amyloid
plaques being the ambulance at the
uh scene of the accident right rather
than the actual causative problem and so
if we end up removing all of the amyloid
plaques and it's actually there to
i don't know trap a virus or whatever
um so so far we're entering phase three
of the you know phase one is safe is
safety
and it's very safe how long have they
been going down this road doesn't it
take a long seven years jesus yeah seven
years
um
phase two
is efficacy and phase three is efficacy
at scale right so uh we've completed a
phase two
we're getting ready to enter phase three
uh we're entering phase two on
parkinson's
um we uh
which is
uh amazing it's um
alpha nucleus is what the target is
there
so here's in uh in hypercholesterolemia
i find it fascinating i have
i have hypercholesterolemia a high ldl
right it's genetic uh my dad had a lot
of heart disease and atrial fibrillation
do you take a statin i do not take a
statin i hate statins
i'm super curious to hear yeah about
that but finished yeah okay so what i
have been taking
is a monoclonal antibody
uh called rapatha
that i inject five mls every two weeks
into my belly fat or my my my uh my
thigh muscle and that monoclonal
antibody so it's an antibody right that
targets a protein in my liver
called pcsk9 and that protein in my
liver is what generates ldl the bad
cholesterol
and so this monoclonal antibody
uh that's very expensive it's 14 000 a
year
right not not cheap it's not it's not
the first second or third line in
defense it's like the last line of
defense because people can't afford it
and so the monoclonal antibody is
manufactured in a vat in this in this uh
regenerons manufacturing facility i get
it i inject it goes to my liver
and and blocks the pcsk9 protein the
antibody attaches and blocks it from
manufacturing ldl
so what we're doing is we are
manufacturing
a vaccine
that you give yourself every six months
and the vaccine
activates your own immune system to
create that same antibody for free
so your immune system creates this
antibody against the pcsk9 goes to the
liver and blocks it except instead of 14
000 a year
the cost is maybe 100 bucks a year
right and so now all of a sudden it can
become
a first line of defense
and it attacks the root cause of the ldl
production
which is then so the idea is can you
preventatively
give vaccinate everybody
so you don't produce the heart disease
or the stroke from that from that ldl
and that it becomes exciting how i got
to the vaccinity story
was that
we are also
in development of a vaccine against bone
loss and muscle loss
and so imagine imagine if when you're
targeting
um
i am i should
it's in the book and i apologize from
not remembering the exact uh targets but
it's basically it's going to be blocking
the osteoclasts which are the cells in
the bone that break down the bone
right so bone is dynamic it's built up
by osteoblasts and it's broken down by
osteoclasts and it's just the way that
if you're a skier and you're stressing
your bones osteoblasts are building up
bones where that stress is if you're in
bed rest for a month it's breaking it
down
and in in muscle um your you know the
sarcopenia which is the technical term
for for for uh muscle loss uh you can
block the muscle breakdown as well so
imagine if you when you build your
muscle up and you build your bone up
that it it just stays
at mass
um one of the things that's exciting uh
i share with my my dear brother lou
reese who's executive chairman of this
company is passionate about space so
imagine being able to go and vaccinate
the astronauts before they go to mars or
before the moon so they don't have the
muscle loss and the bone loss and they
can retain it when they're coming back
and of course the real business
opportunity is in the aging population
where that's a real issue so it's just
another
powerful tool that we talk about in the
book that vaccines
are becoming extraordinary as a tool and
and whether you hate a coveted vaccine
or a love of koa vaccine it's a
technology that has saved
you know
tens if not hundreds of millions of
lives
and so stefan bonsal the ceo moderna is
uh is a friend and the work that they've
done
is
unbelievable right we went from
uh
the
wuhan virus sequence
sent by email to labs around the world
from wuhan
uh to a moderna vaccine designed in 24
hours
whoa
and then from that
design
to being put into production and
approved for distribution in under a
year now this is something it normally
takes seven to ten years to do we did it
all in under a year and built the
manufacturing at scale i mean
that was
shows us what's possible right this is
the exponential age that we're living in
so where is modernity going next
they're
producing
vaccines against all the viruses we
accumulate throughout life so we have
cytomegalovirus herpesvirus
hiv viruses all kinds of things and it
turns out that when you have these
viruses in your bloodstream
they your immune system is constantly
battling to keep them in check
and there's something called
immunodepletion or immunoexhaustion
which is if your immune system is being
used to exhaust
is being exhausted by constantly
fighting these
in dodge these viruses that are in your
system never wiped out
then your immune system's not there to
fight cancer
right and one of the things that people
should know is we're always developing
cancers
the body's always developing cancers
it's just that your immune system finds
them and zaps them
and so the idea of what moderna is going
to go next is
to
develop vaccines against all of these
that generate the antibodies that keep
these in check versus your t cells
keeping them in check and it's an
amazing vision of where they're going
and so i just think we're going to start
to see these brand new sets of tools
remember i said we need to learn how to
modify our software or hardware and this
is modifying our our hardware in this
regard wow yeah it's really incredible
what so regenerative medicine is a big
part of the book yeah that's a big part
of the focus that's something i'm super
excited about
where where is the state of it now yeah
and and maybe even so everyone will
understand the words regenerative and
medicine but what is regenerative
medicine and what's the most exciting
stuff happening yeah sure
and there's a lot
it's
amazing insane so hold on this is where
we have some fun
so uh
our remember i said the placenta is a 3d
printer in the manufactures all the
cells that create the fetus and the the
newborn right it's a 3d printer that
manufactures a baby and then as we grow
in our body we have stem cells all over
the place and stem cells in our bones in
our brain in our muscles and they're
there as the
uh as the repairman
um and you can think of the body there's
a great analogy uh that uh that bob
hurry and auburn gray have used of if
your body is a beautiful mansion like
this incredible place that we are right
now
and
uh
and you have the designs for the place
and you have an army of
repair repairmen in women who are fixing
the place
and
anything goes wrong they fix it anything
wrong they fix it but over time
imagine that
your repair staff are getting older
and dying off
and more senile
and damage starts accumulating
and that's effectively what's going on
inside the body so one of the nine
hallmarks of aging is stem cell
depletion
so between
uh you know a child at birth and someone
who is in their 60s 70s 80s 90s you can
see a hundred fold to a thousand fold
less stem cells in your body
and and so the repair mechanisms
uh you know
are
super weakened
uh regenerative medicine is how do you
revitalize your stem cell populations
how do you augment them
so
bob hiroy who's also part of the book
the book was principally written by by
tony and myself and bob help guide in
light of the the content as well uh he's
my brother from another mother uh great
dude yeah he's amazing uh so bob was a
trauma neurotrauma surgeon amazing and
one day when his daughter was being born
he realized that
the placenta
was growing very large
ahead of the fetus growing like the
fetus was a bean and the planet was
really fully formed and
when he and i were in medical school it
was always a placenta it was a support
organism for the for the fetus but if
that was the case why wasn't it
growing at the same rate as as the
embryo well it turns out it's not it's
generating the the the stem cells and
the cells that are manufacturing the uh
the embryo
and he's the first person to realize how
powerful the placenta is as a source of
uh
of pluripotent stem cells
and uh and immunological cells so
he built
a company within cell gene that's now
part of bristol myers
called uh so celgene was 100 billion
dollar company he was in charge of
cellular medicine about three years four
years ago i helped him
spin that out and we formed a new
company called cellularity which also
just went public this year's it's the uh
company that
is
mines the placenta so we we store
hundreds of thousands of placentas i
have my two
boys 10 years ago were stored the
company anybody's listening if your kids
are if you're if you're pregnant or you
know someone who's pregnant it's a life
bank usa
instead of just storing the cord blood
you can store the placental cells whoa
and so
it's like having the original
boot disk to go back to early days of
computers or the original computer code
of your child
stored
eventually to be able to manufacture
backup organs and manufacture whatever
you might need for that child
and so out of the placenta we extract
stem cells
we extract exosomes which exosomes are
are the so stem cells are generating
these growth factors
and the growth factors are released by
from the stem cells in these little uh
vacuoles these little
fat contained micro cells
that have no dna no organelles it's just
sort of a exotic structure it's a
bilipid structure with these growth
factor chemicals in them and those are
called exosomes and so it's how they're
excreted from stem cells and they're in
the milieur and you can extract them
and
and so you can so i when i go to
fountain life every time i get uh i get
these exosomes injected into my
bloodstream versus the stem cells and
their growth factors going into my do
you have to find ones that are
matched no
no really you don't worry about blood
type nothing nothing the exosomes are
just the growth factors and i'll talk
about why even placental cells don't
require matching
um because they're
they're immunoprivileged if you think
about a surrogate mother
who's carrying a baby that she's not
genetically related to
she doesn't reject the baby and the baby
doesn't reject her
and so there's an immunoprivileged
structure there which is fascinating and
very advantageous wow yeah
it's before the cells are are given
an identity of self by the thymus gland
anyway long story short
the question has been can stem cells
help you
regenerate repair this entire book got
started
when tony was skiing down you know
snoreboarding down a hill uh trying to
follow a 22 year old professional
uh he has this crazy fall
uh and he as he says he has 9.99 pain
out of 10 as he had really damaged his
rotator cuff he thought he'd broken his
neck
and he's going to
all of his surgeons he's going to his
friends what do i do it's surgery
surgery surgery surgery and he called me
up and i said to him troy listen before
you have surgery i think you should
really go and try stem cells and he goes
like what should i do and i said go talk
to bob
uh bob and i set him up at a at a clinic
uh down in panama he went down
he had
stem cell treatments in the joint and
intravenously over the course of three
days
and as he explains it
on the third
day for the first time in
in
years he stands up and he's got no pain
in his back
and which is an unrelated injury
unrelated and
uh and his
shoulder is
uh beginning to feel better and months
later on mri it's completely healed
without any any surgery
now results will vary to be clear uh
tony is a is a mur as a miracle unto
himself and i think his mind over
matters is extraordinary but he got
religion
uh i invited him to a conference uh
uh an x prize event we were having at
the vatican we're piggybacking on the
cure conference that the pope hosts
every every two years
and uh he came and he got so excited
about this and that's when this book was
born and the book opens up with the
story of the vatican conference and um
his injuries and such and regenerative
medicine
is the notion that we can use
stem cells and exosomes and growth
factors
to help regenerate
our body to help regenerate
muscle brain all of the tissues of our
body
a few other areas so
you might have heard about the young
blood
experiments it's a fun
dracula myth here so years ago in fact
bob hurry did a lot of this early work
and it was repeated in amy wager's lab
in at harvard if you take the
circulatory system of a young mouse and
an old mouse and you combine them it's
called parabiosis
the old mouse gets younger and the young
mouse gets older it's like what what up
you know why is this happening and so
what amy wager uh did was
she identified a particular molecule
that is decreasing
as we age um and then it's called gdf11
and she started giving that
to
the old mice and they became younger
whoa
and so uh
there is a company called alevian that's
been
designed to turn that into a drug
they're entering human trials just now
finished with animal trials and it's
being used in certain conditions
but you know you always and when you're
doing an fda trial you can't just say
it's going to affect everything you have
to pick a particular point and say we're
going to look at
neuroinflammation or cardiac conditions
or whatever the case might be and we're
going to measure this
this disease and these molecule these uh
you know markers and see if they get
modified
and so that's exciting um could that you
know uh what have they decided to target
um
they are
decide they're targeting the
cardiovascular system in particular
uh and there's a again uh we talk about
mark allen who's the ceo of that company
who's a friend full disclosure bold as
an investor in in eleven uh as is tony
um
and
uh we'll see i'm excited about that i'm
always look i think you know the biggest
business opportunities on the planet are
going to be
age reversal and health tech and biotech
and so forth you still can't take it
with you right
so there that's one area another area of
regenerative medicine that is blow your
mind level stuff
is
building organs this is nuts we're
heading towards a organ abundance so
today
there are hundreds of thousands of
people on an organ donor list
a lot for kidneys which is the number
one needed and then heart and liver and
lung you know i once wrote a screenplay
about a guy whose wife is dying and he
has to go
harvest the organs of bad guys
uh that's great to work her up the eunos
list that's that's crazy
um
so
right now if you need an organ
transplant
you're hoping
that someone
with an hla match
in other words a match to your surface
antigens dies
and
is an organ donor right so i'm an organ
donor i think that's the right thing to
do i checked it on the form
uh encourage others to consider as well
i hope not to die anytime soon but just
you know just putting that out there
and
you're waiting for that and then the
transplants
if you're in good enough shape and the
organs good enough shape
but we're we're transplanting a fraction
of the list but imagine a future in
which you have a backup set of organs on
hold for you right like in the deep
freeze ready to go
so there are two approaches going on
right now one by an incredible
entrepreneur martine rothblatt who you
know martine uh
is uh is brilliant i've known her for 40
years all right uh martine is on her
seventh moonshot right now wow
she used to be martin
uh and uh when when she was martin she
was the co-founder of xm radio and
sirius radio she was an uh an
uh an fcc regulatory lawyer and an
aerospace engineer and amazing brilliant
person not done much not my life yeah
yeah and and uh she had uh
a uh
a sex change operation remain married to
beena who's brilliant
a number of kids one of her one of her
kids one of martinez uh changed nato
martine one of our teens kids um by the
name of genesis
uh
when sh when martine was now still in xm
radio and serious radio is discovered to
have a fatal disease
called pulmonary fibrosis
and what does martine do
she quits her job she sells her shares
and
sets out to cure her daughter's disease
with no background in biology starts
with a high school biology book
and camps out the medical library and is
reading everything on pulmonary fibrosis
and is tracking down and talking to the
doctors and just you know monomaniacally
like i love this joseph campbell quote
like a a man whose hair is on fire seeks
water right isn't that a great quote
it's so good yeah
yeah and uh
goes after that and
tracks down a potential drug that could
stay the course of pulmonary fibrosis
for her daughter who's only got a couple
years of life left
and
the drug company refuses to provide it
to her
and so
uh martine goes and grabs a whole bunch
of great scientists and advisors and
brings it into her orbit and they go and
they lobby and they finally get the
the drug company to agree to give them
access to that orphan drug which they
had no intention to develop but didn't
want the risk
and what martine gets is a little
baggie of white powder
and she has to go from there
to a
manufacturable drug
to
trials
and lo and behold
it works
and it saves her daughter's life wow and
in the course of that she builds a
back then six billion dollar company
called united therapeutics that she's
the chairwoman and ceo
now it doesn't stop there
because martine realizes that this drug
will stay the course of pulmonary
fibrosis but it doesn't cure promoter
fibrosis and now the question is how do
i manufacture lungs
and so she sets out on three different
approaches to manufacture replacement
lungs
and her primary one she hooks up uh with
craig venter i'm very proud to have made
that connection
and
the idea is
can you take a pig
that happens to have the same size heart
kidney lungs
as humans
and can you modify the surface proteins
of that pig to humanize it make it
human-like so crazy and then engineer
out it's got endogenous retroviruses
that if you put that
pig organ into a human the retroviruses
can pop out and infect the person so to
zap all the retroviruses modify 10
surface genes on that pig
and it was done and how do they modify
the genes crispr
this is insane insane totally insane and
now what happens next
uh they
modified it
uh about
uh six months ago when we're getting
ready to publish and doing last minute
changes in the book ask martine so when
is this likely happen says well by the
time your book is coming out
it's going to be real
right on cue
they do a kidney transplant
into as the first one into a man who was
on life support
but
their family allowed them to do this as
a test
and it went great
uh and then
just recently i think about
two months ago they did a heart
transplant into a recipient who's doing
well
and so
we we have taken
pig organs yes
humanized them yes and for people that
don't know what crispr cast 9 is you
basically go in
and edit the dna yes
insert something else
do you give it the bit of dna to insert
so yes you can do that or you can just
uh you can just cut out a particular
gene so that might show a piece that
does something that works in pigs but
does not work in humans and and cut that
bit out and you can then put in the
proper bit
uh now i don't actually know what the
exact modifications they made so i don't
want to venture but we humanized we
humanized it was 10 genes that were
modified in the past this is bananas
it's bananas
it gets even more bananas
so that's the work that united
therapeutics is doing and you know uh if
you sacrifice like one percent of the
pigs that eat every year there'd be
enough organs for everybody on the
planet right i mean it's crazy stuff
uh the second thing is one of my
favorite heroes a guy named dean caiman
right dean dean is brilliant
people know him for creating the segway
which is
the last thing on the list that he's
done that's amazing uh he uh created the
you know uh
the implantable insulin pump he's
created uh the luke arm for people
who've lost their arms he's created luke
the luke arm um it's a robotic arm that
allows you to you know basically it's
named after luke skywalker of course
yeah yes i love that uh yeah anyway uh
but
uh the slingshot machine that makes
purified water from anything wet
including sewage i mean it's he's
incredible all right i won't go i won't
go down that path
three years ago
he sets out on a journey
backed by the defense department
to build a machine
that in one end goes
induced pluripotent stem cells you take
a skin cell
you modify it you de-differentiate it to
a stem cell you put that in
and then over the course of
one to three months
you manufacture an organ
this is so
this is yeah like yeah and and guess
what
they've
done it for bone ligament bone segments
so if you need uh a knee operation or an
ankle operation you take some skin cell
you differ differentiate it you put in
machine and you get out of it bone
ligament bone with your genetic code in
it
where they're going next
is going after pediatric hearts wow and
so their goal is by
2023 next 18 months you'll put a child's
skin cell
de-differentiated to an induced
pluripotent stem cell
and i think it's about a three month
period of time
your manufactured heart comes out for
transplant
it's
insane
so
so that people understand how this is
already happening now what have we done
in animal models with hearts
in particular because i know the
punchline but for people that don't i
think this will be
it
because hearing that oh in 18 months
will be making human organs i'm like no
way
but if you hear some of the stuff that's
already being done yeah it starts to
seem so real so tony atala's lab
at wake forest tony's been manufacturing
stem cell derived uh simple organs for
some time he's manufactured bladders
the skin is an organ so full thickness
skin with epidermis and dermis for
transplant like if you're a burn victim
right being able to
go from your skin stem cells and
manufacture sheets of your skin that
could then transplant in
they've manufactured
micro beating hearts
you know a few centimeters in size
one of the things
there's a friend
deepak srivastava who's the president of
the gladstone institute up up in
northern california
and the work that he's done
again blows me away i call it cellular
alchemy your heart
is made up of
uh
myocytes muscle cells beating cardiac
myocytes that you know beat on a regular
rhythm and connective tissue uh
fibroblasts
and
when you have a heart attack
the muscle tissue dies
and the connective tissue replaces it
but it's
all of a sudden it's not
beating and so your cardiac output can
be significantly reduced and what
srivastava has done is
been able to
use gene therapy
to convert those
fibroblasts
into
myocytes so you turn the connective
tissue into beating heart once again
right because the genes are there
they're just differentiated as
connective tissue and not as
heart muscle cells dude people are
finding ways to tell a cell to be
something different yes that's so
like sci-fi it is i love cellular
alchemy because that's my favorite i i i
gave it that name because i love it
because it describes what we're talking
about literally like the idea so alchemy
if anybody's not familiar the i the
pursuit of turning lead into gold yes so
taking one thing and making it another
but at the cellular level because the
cells contain the full dna if you know
the sequence of chemicals i'm not sure
what the actual thing is but whatever
that thing that the alchemy part is it
actually works like this is okay nuts i
have to talk about one more thing before
out of time
uh which is the revolution in
diagnostics
so i said uh for
living as long as you can
it's
food exercise sleep mindset is so
critically important i'll come to that
next and then not dying for something
stupid
so
it turns out most everyone out there is
an optimist if you go up to someone in
the street and say do you have cancer
growing in you do you have an aneurysm
do you have any problems that you should
know about it's like pause say no i feel
great right and i don't want to go to
the doctor because i don't want to know
which is of course you want to
know because you can do something about
it
so um one of the companies that we built
uh
fountain life and there's a sister
company uh the health nucleus at human
longevity down in san diego
fountain life is in uh four cities and
we'll be in a dozen cities in the next
uh in the next 18 months
i just went there two days ago down in
the facility in naples
and
i get uploaded every year
and that upload involves about five
hours of my time i go and i get a full
body mri
brain mri brain vasculature coronary mri
uh i then
uh and it's looking for any sign of any
cancer looking for a sign of any
aneurysms or any aberration
and then i did what's called an ai
enabled clearly coronary ct
long story what it's doing is it's a
it's a ct of your heart
using artificial intelligence to analyze
the blood vessels
uh you probably heard about calcium
scores right is your heart are your
heart vessels calcified and you know oh
my god you had a calcium square of a
thousand that's terrible or calcium
score of zero that's great calcification
actually doesn't matter
because if you're if your plaque in your
coronary artery is calcified if it's
hard
you're fine
it's not going to rupture it's only if
it's occluded that you're concerned what
the clearly ct does is it looking for
soft plaque
that isn't calcified yet that could
rupture
and that's what really truly matters
and so it's changed completely how we
look at cardiac disease
we do a dexa scan looking at muscle and
bone
we do your genome your gut microbiome
all of your omics it's about 150
gigabytes of data
and i go every year
i feel naked
until i go through it
and then
i
you know if i'm gonna find something
it's okay i'm gonna attack it and fix it
so we're all optimists about our health
and you everyone knows about someone who
went to the hospital and oh my god
you've got stage three or stage four
cancer it didn't happen that morning
yeah right if you detect cancer at stage
three or stage four your chance of a
cure
is like 10
if you detect it at stage 0 or stage 1
it's like 99 wow right so it's not it
varies for different cancers but the
idea is we're all developing cancers
your immune system hopefully catches it
but otherwise we give people a grail
test as well so
for me fountain life is like one of the
most important
reinventing how we do how we do health
care and one of the things we just
launched which i'm so proud of is
fountain health
and it's a ha so i wrote my last book
the future is fast and you think that
the insurance industry is perverted when
you get when you get
fire insurance it pays you after your
house burns down
life insurance pays you after or pays
your next can after your debt health
insurance pays you after you're sick so
we created fountain health
as a health insurance it's available for
companies right now 50 employees or more
and then it will grow from there
but
when you get found health insurance
which is the same price as regular
health insurance you get all the tests
included at no additional cost
because our goal is to
to catch any disease
first
before
it becomes
something that's expensive to treat
later on
dude this is amazing i'm very sad that
we have a hard stop today and we have
reached it but dude the book is
phenomenal i loved it and this ketchup
was absolutely amazing where can people
find you and learn more about all this
incredible so
twitter and instagram it's at peter
diamandis fountain and uh
my life horse which are the products
that
uh we support and then i created
something called longevity insider.org
it's an ai engine
that scans the world's news
looking for
exponential technologies impacting
vitality and longevity and it generates
a uh a newsletter of the top 15
breakthroughs every day on longevity and
it's free and you can unsubscribe you
don't like it but it
just keeps me in this positive mindset
so the other place is
longevityinsider.org i love it yeah dude
thank you so much for coming on the show
it is always so good always a blessing
to you i love it
everybody read the book life force it's
incredible it will blow your mind what
is already possible and what's coming in
the future and speaking of things that
will blow your mind if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe and until
next time my friends be legendary take
care peace